Title: jank development update - Dynamic bindings and more!
Date: Feb 23, 2024
Author: Jeaye Wilkerson
Author-Url: https://github.com/jeaye
Description: jank now support dynamic vars, meta hints, reader macros, and
             exceptions!
Image: https://jank-lang.org/img/logo-dark.png

For the past couple of months, I have been focused on tackling dynamic var
bindings and meta hints, which grew into much, much more. Along the way, I've
learned some neat things and have positioned jank to be ready for a lot more
outside contributions. Grab a seat and I'll explain it all! Much love to
[Clojurists Together](https://www.clojuriststogether.org/), who have sponsored
some of my work this quarter.

## Vars and roots
I estimated that dynamic bindings would take me a while to implement, mainly
because, even after several years of using Clojure, I still didn't know how they
worked. It's because of this that I'll now explain it to all of you. We can
break it down into two parts:

1. Var roots
2. Var bindings (overrides)

So, firstly, each var is a container for an object (though vars may start out
unbound, they still hold a special unbound object regardless). That object is
known as the var's root. When you define a var with `def` or `defn`, you're
generally providing its root.

```clojure
; person is a var and its root is "sally"
(def person "sally")

; add is a var and its root is an instance of the fn
(defn add [x y]
  (+ x y))
```

When we refer to a var by its name, we're implicitly dereferencing that var in
order to get its root.

```clojure
; You write this.
(println person)

; Implicitly, it does something more like this.
(println (deref #'person))
```

When we use a REPL client to re-evaluate a file, which evaluates the `def` and
`defn` forms again, we end up changing the root of those vars. The old root is
gone entirely. There's another way we can alter the root of a var, which is
using the `alter-var-root` function. This is very similar to just redefining it.
The old root is gone.

However, for some vars, we want to change the root for only a short period of
time, after which we'll want the old value replaced. We can do this with
`with-redefs`.

```clojure
(println person) ; => sally

; Within the scope of this form, we redefine our var.
(with-redefs [person "joe"]
  (println person)) ; => joe

; Now it's back to being sally.
(println person) ; => sally
```

An important thing to note is that changing a var root affects every running
thread of the program. The var root is global and synchronized. This is great,
for some things, but sometimes we only want to change a var on our current
thread. For example, in Clojure there is a var called `*out*` which holds a
`java.io.Writer` object. Any core functions which write to stdout will write to that
object. Let's say we have a particular bit of code where we want to write to a
file.

```clojure
; Open a file, redefine *out* to point to the writer, and then write to *out*.
(with-open [log (clojure.java.io/writer "system.log" :append true)]
  (with-redefs [*out* log]
    (println "this should go into a file")))
```

This works! However, if you have any other threads which are also writing to
`*out*`, you may find that what they write ends up going into your log file,
too! This is because every thread is affected by the changing of a var's root.
So how would we avoid this problem? Dynamic bindings!

## Dynamic bindings
With dynamic bindings, we can supply an "override" for a var, without changing
its root. Even better, that override is tied only to our current thread. The way
that this works is that, separate from the var itself, Clojure keeps track of a
map of overrides. The map is from var to value. Something like this:

```clojure
{#'*out* log}
```

There's one extra trick here, though. Rather than just a single map of
overrides, we have a stack. Each time a var is overridden, a new map is pushed
onto the stack. We always pull from the top of the stack to the get latest value
for a var. Let's take a look at an example.

```clojure
(def ^:dynamic *foo* 42)

(binding [*foo* 0]
  (binding [*foo* 100]
    (println *foo*)) ; => 100
  (println *foo*)) ; => 0
```

Here, we have a var which has a root of 42. We note this var as dynamic, which
means we can provide these overrides, known as bindings. There's a `binding`
macro which helps us do this, but all it does it push the new override and then
pop at the end. Our stack (which is a linked list) of overrides might look something like this:

```clojure
; Initially, no overrides, let's say. An empty stack.
'()

; When we bind *foo* to 0, we add an override.
'({#'*foo* 0})

; When we bind *foo* to 100, we add an override.
'({#'*foo* 100} {#'*foo* 0})

; At the end of each binding form, we pop from the top of the stack.
```

With this stack of overrides, we just need to update the `deref` implementation
for vars to not just return the root. Instead, they check if the var has any
overrides and then returns the latest override, falling back on the root if
there is none. In jank's C++ code, that looks like this:

```cpp
object_ptr var::deref() const
{
  auto const binding(get_thread_binding());
  if(binding)
  { return binding->value; }
  return *root.rlock();
}
```

## Binding conveyance
There's one other neat thing about dynamic bindings which can't go unmentioned.
When you make a new thread in Clojure, the current var overrides you have get
copied over to the new thread. The same applies to async blocks in core.async.
This allows you to set up some var state and push it to another thread without
needing to rebuild everything. With core.async, each time your task becomes
unparked, bindings are re-established to what they were before. This ends up
being super convenient and can feel magical.

Thanks to Tim Baldridge for [his post](https://cognitect.com/blog/2016/9/15/works-on-my-machine-understanding-var-bindings-and-roots)
on this stuff, which helped put it more into terms I could understand. My goal
here has been to reiterate and elucidate.

## Status report
Ok, so all of this is implemented in jank now. I could've just said that from
the beginning, I know, but I get paid by the character still, I swear. jank
doesn't have `future` yet, but everything is in place for binding conveyance. To
go hand in hand with this, I tackled meta hints next, allowing us to do things
like `^:dynamic` on a var.

## Meta hints
This one doesn't get a big explanation. jank now supports hints in the form of
`^:keyword`, as well as `^{:keyword true}`. Multiple hints can be specified,
they can be nested, etc. Not many parts of jank are using these hints yet, since
I didn't go through all existing code to update usages, but we can do that
iteratively. See? I can be brief.

## What else?
Well, my quarter was booked for the following tasks:

* 🗹 Dynamic vars
* 🗹 Meta hints
* ☐ Syntax quoting
* ☐ Normalized interpolation syntax

The first two are done and the latter two remain, to be done in the next month.
But is that all I did in two months? Just dynamic vars and meta hints? Nah.

## Support for exceptions
I've added support for the special `throw` form, as well as for `try/catch/finally`.
Previously, I was using inline C++ to throw exceptions, but the work on the
dynamic vars gave me a good excuse to get proper exception support in there. I
needed to ensure bindings were gracefully handled in exceptional scenarios!

My plan is to do a compiler deep dive, next post, going into how exceptions were
implemented in jank. Stay tuned for that.

## Escaped string literals
jank previously didn't properly support strings like `"foo \"bar\" spam"`, since
they require mutation in order to unescape them. This is an interesting edge
case, because all of the other tokens within jank's lexer work based on memory
mapped string views. String views allow jank's lexer to run without any dynamic
allocations at all. However, for escaped strings, we need to allocate a string,
since we need to mutate it when unescaping. It's straight-forward, but just
something I hadn't tackled yet.

## Reader macros
Since I was improving the reader to support meta hints, I figured I'd add reader
macro support. In jank, you can now use `#_` to comment out forms. Also, you can
use `#{}` to create sets. Finally, you can use `#?(:jank foo)` and `#?@(:jank [])` to
conditionally read in jank code. The `:default` option is supported, too.
Support for shorthand functions, regex values, and var quotes will be
coming soon.

## New core functions and macros
While implementing the above features, I also added support for the following
vars in `clojure.core`:

* `assert`
* `when-not`
* `comment`
* `zipmap`
* `binding`
* `with-redefs`
* `drop` (not lazy)
* `take-nth` (not lazy)

Since jank doesn't have lazy sequences yet, some of these functions are a little
hacky. Lazy sequences come next quarter, though, as well as `loop` support!

## Community involvement
But wait, there's more! jank received its first non-trivial code contributions
this quarter, from a helpful man named [Saket Patel](https://github.com/Samy-33).
He's working on a [jank plugin](https://github.com/Samy-33/lein-jank) for leiningen
and it's currently in a state where you can set up a multi-file jank project and
use `lein jank run` to make magic happen. 😁 He's also submitted some C++
improvements to aid in that quest and to help jank compile on Apple M1 hardware.
I'll have a more detailed demonstration of this in my next development update.

On top of that, in order to get him set up for contributing, I've done the
following:

* Added a [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/jank-lang/jank/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)
* Added a [CLA](https://cla-assistant.io/jank-lang/jank), which is managed by a
  bot that will prompt you to sign upon submitting a PR with a large enough
* Added automated code formatting and re-formatted the whole codebase, using
  clang-format. I don't like the look of it, but at least it's consistent

## Would you like to join in?
1. Join the community on [Slack](https://clojurians.slack.com/archives/C03SRH97FDK)
2. Join the design discussions or pick up a ticket on [GitHub](https://github.com/jank-lang/jank)
3. Considering becoming a [Sponsor](https://github.com/sponsors/jeaye) ❤️ 
4. **Hire me full-time to work on jank!**
